If youth but knew, and age were able,  Then poverty would be a fable. If youth knew what age would crave,  It would both get and save. A lame crab walks straight. A little water is a sea to an ant. A porcupine speaking to its baby says, "O my child of velvet." A river is not contaminated by having a dog drink from it. Allah has said, "Start moving so that I may start blessing." Blood cannot be washed out with blood. Blood is thick than water. Blood will have blood. Blood will tell. Bloom where you are planted. Cats don't catch mice to please God. Debt severs love. Don't be a thief and you won't fear the king. Don't show me the palm tree, show me the dates. Five fingers are brothers but not equals. Five of them would run from the bang of one empty gun. Give even an onion graciously. Give every man his due. Having been bitten by a snake, he's afraid of a rope. If a forest catches fire, both the dry and the wet will burn up. If you deal in camels, make the doors high. If you want to keep camels, have a big enough door. In an ant colony dew is a flood. It's the same donkey, but with a new saddle. No one says his own buttermilk is sour. A barber does not shave himself. A chick that will grow into a cock can be spotted the very day it hatches. A child's fingers are not scalded by a piece of hot yam which his mother puts into his palm. A comb becomes bad when it hurts you. A cutting word is worse than a bowstring, a cut may heal, but the cut of the tongue does not. A fool looks for dung where the cow never browsed. A fool may chance to put something into a wise man's head. A proud heart can survive a general failure because such a failure does not prick its pride. A stranger has big eyes but sees nothing. A stream cannot rise about its source. A weapon which you don't have in your hand won't kill a snake. Ashes fly back into the face of him who throws them. Before shooting, one must aim. Confiding a secret to an unworthy person is like carrying grain in a bag with a hole. Do not call to a dog with a whip in your hand. Don't set sail on someone else's star. For tomorrow belongs to the people who prepare for it today. He who is being carried does not realize how far the town is. He who is born a fool is never cured. He who learns, teaches. He who talks incessantly, talks nonsense. If a child washes his hands he could eat with kings. If you climb up a tree, you must climb down the same tree. If you don't stand for something, you will fall for something. If you don't work you shan't eat. Old Satan couldn't get along without plenty of help. A razor may be sharper than an ax, but it cannot cut wood. A parasite cannot live alone. If you do not have patience you cannot make beer. There is not enough room for two elephants to sit in the same shade. The country rooster dows not crow in the town. The partridge loves peas, but not those that go into the pot with it. When you see a palm tree, the palm tree has seen you. When you see a turtle on top of a fence post, you know he had some help. Do not speak of a rhinoceros if there is no tree nearby. This world is a harsh place, this world.  [Sulu, Lomhlaba Unzima, Lohmhlaba.] This, too, shall pass. It takes a heap of licks to strike a nail in the dark. If all the seeds that fall were to grow, then no one could follow the path under the trees. If an ass goes a-traveling, he'll not come home a horse. Marriage is like a groundnut:  you have to crack them to see what is inside. One should never rub bottoms with a porcupine. The family is like the forest:  if you are outside, it is dense; if you are inside, you see that each tree has its own position. The rain wets the leopard's spots but does not wash them off. Sharp acids corrode their own containers. She fries in her own grease. A dog is a man's best friend. A dose of adversity is often as needful as a dose of medicine. A girl with cotton stockings never sees a mouse. A malignant sore throat is a danger; a malignant throat not sore is worse. A man can die just once. A man can't do more than he can do.  What says Don Ferdinando? A man is as big as the things that made him mad. A man never becomes an orator if he has something to say. A miss is as good as a mile. A poor man is always behind. A tree never hits an automobile except in self defense. All men are fools, but all fools are not men. All men are not cast in the same mold. An American will go to hell for a bag of coffee. Bad news travels fast. Bad planning on your part does not constitute an emergency on my part. Bad the crow, bad the egg. Boys will be boys. By the yard, life is hard.  By the inch, it's a cinch. Christmas comes, but once a year is enough. Close, but no cigar. Crap or get off the pot. Don't close the barn door after the horse runs away. Don't cry over spilt milk. Don't cry till you are out of the wood. Many words will not fill a bushel. To lie about a far country is easy. The man who claims to be the boss in his own home will lie about other things as well. Zeal is fit only for wise men but is found mostly in fools. A promise is a cloud; fulfillment is rain. After dinner, rest; after supper walk a mile. All sunshine makes the desert. An army of sheep led by a lion would defeat an army of lions led by a sheep. Dawn does not come twice to awaken a man. Death rides a fast camel. Dwell not upon thy weariness, thy strength shall be according to the measure of thy desire. Examine what is said, not him who speaks. Example is better than precept. Go and wake up your cook. He who has health has hope; and he who has hope, has everything. It is good to know the truth, but it is better to speak of palm trees. Live together like brothers and do business like strangers. Never give advice in a crowd. Never sit in the place of a man who can say to you, "Rise.". Never speak ill of the dead. On the day of victory no one is tired. On the first of March, the crows begin to search. Sunshine all the time makes a desert. The enemy of my enemy is my friend. The English are a nation of shopkeepers. The whisper of a pretty girl can be heard further than the roar of a lion. A book is a garden carried in the pocket. A book is like a garden carried in the pocket. A book that remains shut, is but a block. A kind word can attract even the snake from his nest. A little and a little, collected together, becomes a great deal; the heap in the barn consists of single grains, and drop and drop makes an inundation. A little bird wants but a little nest. A little body doth often harbour a great soul. A little debt makes a debtor, a great one an enemy. A man profits more by the sight of an idiot than by the orations of the learned. All mankind is divided into three classes:  those that are immovable, those that are moveable, and those that move. Beware of one who flatters unduly; he will also censure unjustly. Compete, don't envy. Death is a black camel that lies down at every door.  Sooner or later you must ride the camel. Death is a black camel which kneels at every man's gate. Diligence is a great teacher. Diligence is the mother of good luck. Do not cut down the tree that gives you shade. Fear not the man who fears God. I am a prince and you are a prince; who will lead the donkeys?. If begging should unfortunately be thy lot, knock at the large gates only. If you have much, give of your wealth; if you have little, give of your heart. If you stop every time a dog barks, your road will never end. Judge a man by the reputation of his enemies. Judge not of a ship as she lies on the stocks. Know each other as if your were brothers; negotiate deals as if you were strangers to each other. Curses are like young chickens,  And still come home to roost!      - Proverb, A chameleon does not leave one tree until he is sure of another. A change is as good as a rest. A foolish man may be known by six things:  Anger without cause, speech without profit, change without progress, inquiry without object, putting trust in a stranger, and mistaking foes for friends. A friend advises in his interest, not yours. A horse of good breed is not dishonored by his saddle. A horse that will not carry a saddle must have no oats. A house divided cannot stand. A known mistake is better than an unknown truth. A mouth that praises and a hand that kills. A secret is like a dove:  when it leaves my hand it takes wing. A sense of humor is the pole that adds balance to our steps as we walk the tightrope of life. A wise man associating with the vicious becomes an idiot; a dog traveling with good men becomes a rational being. Arrogance diminishes wisdom. Arrogance is a weed that grows mostly on a dunghill. Ask the experienced rather than the learned. Ask thy purse what thou should'st buy. At the narrow passage there is no brother and no friend. Believe what you see and lay aside what you hear. Call someone your lord and he'll sell you in the slave market. Do not buy either the moon or the news, for in the end they will both come out. Eat whatever thou likest, but dress as others do. Eat whatever you like, but dress as others do. Every ambitious man is a captive and every covetous one a pauper. Every day of your life is a page of your history. Every sun has to set. God sells knowledge for labour, honour for risk. The one who loves you will make you weep. It's not the fault of the pig, but of the one who scratches his back. It's not the gay coat that makes the gentleman. It's not the heat, it's the humidity. Thunder clouds do not always give rain. You are as many a person as languages you know. If it moves, salute it; if it doesn't move, pick it up; and if you can't pick it up, paint it. One cannot both feast and become rich. Do not spread your corn to dry at an enemy's door. Do not stand in a place of danger trusting in miracles. Those who lose dreaming are lost. Those who play at bowls must look out for rubbers. Beauty is ten, nine of which is dressing. Beauty without virtue is a curse. Cheap meat never makes a good soup. Courage is ten, nine is the ability to escape. Courage mounteth with occasion. He can't see the beam in his own, but he's looking for an eyelash in someone else's. I tried to draw the eyebrow, but I ended up poking the eye. It's not shameful not to know, but it's shameful not to ask. Make sure your blanket covers your feet. Never mind storms and snows for the sake of a friend. One's own simple bread is much better than someone else's pilaf. Pass the bridge that your kinsmen have passed. Saying "halva-halva" won't make your mouth sweet. The forest can't be without its jackals. Until spring comes, nightingales do not sing. Until the lions have their historians, tales of the hunt shall always glorify the hunter. Wrap yourself together in a carpet and roll together with your kinsmen. Do not try to cook the goat's young in the goat's milk. Goodness shouts. Evil whispers. Every beast roars in its own den. The earth is a beehive; we all enter by the same door but live in different cells. Visitors' footfalls are like medicine; they heal the sick. God is a good worker but loves to be helped. Truth may walk through the world unarmed. Don't make use of another's mouth unless it has been leant to you. Don't make waves. Experience is the comb that nature gives us when we are bald. Experience is the father of wisdom. Experience keeps a dear school. The beautiful is less what one sees than what one dreams. The bee, from her industry in the summer, eats honey all the winter. The beggar may sing before the thief. Don't call the alligator a big-mouth till you have crossed the river. Don't carry all your eggs in one basket. Don't hang your hat higher than you can reach. Abuse of hospitality breaks the bridge. Unless a man is simple, he cannot recognize God, the Simple One. Silence is the door of consent. The blacker the berry the sweeter the juice. One who lies for you will also lie against you. Who lies for you will lie against you. Never promise a poor person, and never owe a rich one. Never put off till tomorrow what you can do today. One who does not look ahead remains behind. Biting and scratching is Scots folk's wooing. Love laughs at locksmiths. The cow that's first up gets the first of the dew. If you burn a house, can you conceal the smoke? The talker will lead the dog to the meat market. When the master is absent, the frogs hop into the house. A gentle word opens an iron gate. God promises a safe landing but not a calm passage. If you call one wolf, you invite the pack. If you can kiss the mistress, never kiss the maid. If you can't be good, be careful. If you can't beat em, join em. If you let everyone walk over you, you become a carpet. If you wish to drown, do not torture yourself with shallow water. Seize opportunity by the beard, for it is bald behind. When the sea turned into honey, the poor man lost his spoon. You are permitted in times of great danger to walk with the devil until you have crossed the bridge. A stupid act entails doing the work twice over. Beware of a man's shadow and a bee's sting. If you take big paces you leave big spaces. If you truly want honesty, don't ask questions you don't really want the answer to. If you trust before you try,  You will repent before you die. Only with a new ruler do you realize the value of the old. Only your real friends will tell you when your face is dirty. Seven days is the length of a guest's life. Sparrows who emulate peacocks are likely to break a thigh. Cultivate a heart of love that knows no anger. A chattering bird builds no nest. A cherry year, a merry year; a plum year, a dumb year. By trying often, the monkey learns to jump from the tree. He who asks questions cannot avoid the answers. Rain does not fall on one roof alone. The elephant will reach to the roof of the house. The heart of the wise man lies quiet like limpid water. Thought breaks the heart. Thought is free. You come with a cat and call it a rabbit. For love of the ox the wolf licks the yoke. He who hunts after bargains will scratch his head. He who waits for another's platter has a cold meal. Love does much, money does all. Secret fire is discovered by its smoke. Who is tender in everything is a fool in everything. A bad word whispered will echo a hundred miles. A bad worker quarrels with his tools. A bad workman blames his tools. A bar of iron continually ground becomes a needle. A beautiful bird is the only kind we cage. A bird can roost but on one branch, a mouse can drink not more than its fill from a river. A bird does not sing because it has an answer.  It sings because it has a song. A bit of fragrance always clings to the hand that gives you roses. A book holds a house of gold. A bride received into the home is like a horse that you have just bought; you break her in by constantly mounting her and continually beating her. A bridle for the tongue is a necessary piece of furniture. A chicken is hatched even from such a well-sealed thing as an egg. A child's life is like a piece of paper on which every passerby leaves a mark. A clever person turns great troubles into little ones and little ones into none at all. A client twixt his attorney and counselor is like a goose twixt two foxes. A closed mind is like a closed book; just a block of wood. A cloth is not woven from a single thread. A country where flowers are priced so as to make them a luxury has yet to learn the first principles of civilization. A courageous foe is better than a cowardly friend. A courtesy much entreated is half recompensed. A crisis is an opportunity riding the dangerous wind. A day of sorrow is longer than a month of joy. A dog in desperation will leap over a wall. A dog won't forsake his master because of poverty; a son never deserts his mother because of her homely appearance. A fall into a ditch makes you wiser. What the eye sees not, the heart craves not. Walls have ears. Do not talk Arabic in the house of a Moor. He who must die, must die in the dark, even though he sells candles. Be not ashamed of mistakes and thus make them crimes. If thy strength will serve, go forward in the ranks; if not, stand still. If to-day will not, to-morrow may. If two ride on a horse, one must ride behind. A cat goes to a monastery, but she still remains a cat. A pretty basket does not prevent worries. A pretty face and fine clothes do not make character. A priest sees people at their best, a lawyer at their worst, but a doctor sees them as they really are. Death does not sound a trumpet. Little by little grow the bananas. Lower your head modestly while passing, and you will harvest bananas. No matter how full the river, it still wants to grow. No matter how hard you throw a dead fish in the water, it still won't swim. What is said over the dead lion's body could not be said to him alive. When the bee comes to your house, let her have beer; you may want to visit the bee's house some day. The absent are always in the wrong. Always drink upstream from the herd. Don't squat with your spurs on. If you find yourself in a hole, the first thing to do is stop digging. If you get to thinking you're a person of some influence, try ordering somebody else's dog around. It don't take a genius to spot a goat in a flock of sheep. Never ask a barber if you need a haircut. Timing has a lot to do with the outcome of a rain dance. Cutting off a mule's ears doesn't make it a horse. Tell me whom you love and I'll tell you who you are. Better a lie that soothes than a truth that hurts. Do not protect yourself by a fence, but rather by your friends. He who cannot cut the bread evenly cannot get on well with people. It is not the thief who is hanged, but one who was caught stealing. The big thieves hang the little ones. When you go to buy, use your eyes, not your ears. The way one eats is the way one works. The way to be safe is never to feel secure. We will be known by the tracks we leave behind. A bad hair cut is two people's shame. A bad horse eats as much as a good one. A bad tree does not yield good apples. A bad wife wishes her husband's heel turned homewards, and not his toe. A barren sow is never kind to pigs. A bird may be ever so small, it always seeks a nest of its own. A bird never flew on one wing. A blind pigeon may sometimes find a grain of wheat. A bold attempt is half success. A bold man has luck in his train. A boor remains a boor, though he sleep on silken bolsters. A borrowed horse and your own spurs make short miles. A bow long bent at length waxeth weak. A burnt child fears the fire, and a bitten child fears a dog. A child must creep until it learns to walk. A child's back must be bent early. A child's sorrow is short-lived. A clean hand moves freely through the land. A clever man's inheritance is found in every country. A cow is not called dappled unless she has a spot. A cross-grained woman and a snappish dog take care of the house. A crow is never the whiter for often washing. A crow thinks her own bird fairest. A crowd is not company. A curse will not strike out an eye, unless the fist go with it. Every man's friend is every man's fool. Fair words won't fill the sack. Help yourself, and God will help you. It is a poor mouse that has but one hole. Little fish are sweet. Need makes the old wife trot. The cow does not know the value of her tail till she has lost it. The cow gives good milk, but kicks over the pail. Set a thief to catch a thief. Set hard heart against hard hap. Strike while the iron is hot. Well begun is half done. Look not a gift horse in the mouth. Look not out for dead men's shoes. Out of sight out of mind. Out of the fullness of the heart the mouth speaks. Out of the fulness of the heart the mouth speaketh. Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee. Hunger is the best sauce. It is good to sleep in a whole skin. The morning hour has gold in its mouth. New brooms sweep clean. Man proposes, God disposes. Man punishes the action, but God the intention. Necessity knows no law. Three women and a goose make a market. One swallow does not make a summer. Luck has but a slender anchorage. When the cat's away the mice will play. Still waters run deep. None so deaf as those who won't hear. Wash a dog, comb a dog, still a dog remains a dog. All are not hunters that blow the horn. Faint heart never won fair lady. As you make your bed so you must lie on it. As you make your bed so you must lie upon it. Like will to like. Likeness is the mother of love. Lilies are whitest in a blackmoor's hand. Love me little and love me long. Every man thinks his copper is gold. Every man thinks his own geese swans. Everybody says it, nobody knows it. Great men's requests are commands. He who laughs last, laughs best. He who laughs last, laughs longest. He who tickles himself can laugh when he pleases. It is a wise child that knows its own father. It is no child's play when an old woman dances. Let every man carry his own sack to the mill. Pride will have a fall. He who has a good neighbour has a good morning. One enemy is too much, and a hundred friends are not enough. One Englishman can beat three Frenchmen. What is done cannot be undone. Marry you son when you will, and your daughter when you can. A devil with fine manners can still carry you only to hell. A hawk kills because it is his nature; a man because it is his pleasure. A rabbithorn cannot be a war-horse and will only become a laughingstock if he should try. A roan horse and a black can travel equally far in a day's journey. All the smiths . . . can't mend a broken egg. All women are alike when the lamp is out. An oath broken by one does not thereafter bind the other. Bare is brotherless back. Better lady in a cottage than serving-woman in a castle. Call a woman a harlot and you make her one. Can a burst dam be mended with toothpicks? Can a mill go with the water that's past? Can a mouse fall in love with a cat? Chickens can't go back into eggs. Does the left hand chop off the right? Don't ask a dog to judge between a pillar and a tree. Don't kick the horse you have to ride. Don't trust your bone to another man's dog. Don't try to buy fish in the Dry Towns. Don't try to run before you can walk. Don't try to walk before you can crawl. Each man must ride the road of his own fate. Each snowflake in an avalanche pleads its innocence. Eggs should not fight stones. Falcons don't fly after cage-birds. A beggar's estate lies in all lands. A beggar's hand is a bottomless basket. A blind man may sometimes shoot a crow. A brilliant daughter make a brittle wife. A cat that meweth much catcheth but few mice. A cock is valiant on his own dunghill. A cow-year, a sad year; a bull-year, a glad year. A daily guest is a great thief in the kitchen. A dog with a bone knows no friends. A flying crow always catches something. A fool and his money are soon parted. A fool may chance to say a wise thing. A fool may give a wise man counsel. A fool may meet with good fortune, but the wise only profits by it. A friend at one's back is a safe bridge. A friend is better than money in the purse. A friend's dinner is soon dressed. A good fire makes a quick cook. A good friend is better than silver and gold. A good horse is worth his fodder. A good name is better than oil (i.e. riches). A great book is a great evil. A guest, like a fish, stinks the third day. A guilty conscience needs no accuser. A handful of patience is worth more than a bushel of brains. Fine feathers make fine birds. Better a ruined than a lost land. Between two stools the breech comes to the ground. Between two stools you come to the ground. Enough is better than too much. Honey is sweet, but the bee stings. It is too late to lock the stable door when the steed is stolen. Necessity is the mother of invention. Once is no custom. One take-this, is better than two thou-shalt-haves. One tale is good till another is told. Promising and performing are two things. Shear the sheep but don't flay them. What the sober man thinks the drunkard tells. What the soldier said isn't evidence. Barking dogs don't bite. Barking dogs seldom bite. Barnaby bright, Barnaby bright, the longest day and the shortest night. Barren corn makes bitter bread. By night all cats are grey. Great thieves hang little thieves. Lightly come, lightly go. Lightning never strikes the same place twice. Marry in haste and repent at leisure. Marry in haste repent at leisure. Marry in May, rue for aye. Show me a liar, and I'll show you a thief. One good turn deserves another. A hungry belly has no ears. All's well that ends well. Hunger drives the wolf out of the wood. Like master, like man. All is not gold that glitters. Short reckonings make long friends. Better be envied than pitied. Honours change manners. Ill weeds grow apace. Misfortunes never come single. Misfortunes never come singly. Misfortunes that can't be avoided must be sweetened. Misfortunes, when asleep, are not to be awakened. No rose without a thorn. The tree does not fall at the first stroke. The tree is known by its fruit. The workman is known by his work. Every one for himself, and God for us all. Tell me the company you keep, and I will tell you who you are. It is good fishing in troubled waters. A burnt child dreads the fire. A cat may look at a king. A hired horse and one's own spurs make short miles. A hog in armor is still a hog. A honey tongue, a heart of gall. A lean compromise is better than a fat lawsuit. A little too late is much too late. A word is enough to the wise. After meat comes mustard. After rain comes sunshine. An old coachman loves the crack of the whip. Better half an egg than empty shells. Birds of a feather flock together. Claw me and I'll claw thee. Dead dogs don't bite. Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking savour. Don't buy a cat in a sack. Eagles do not breed doves. Eagles don't catch flies. East or west, home is best. East, west, home's best. God helps the strongest. Handsome apples are sometimes sour. Handsome is as handsome does. He who would cheat a peasant, must take one with him. A crown is no cure for the headache. Wake not a sleeping dog. While the grass grows, the steed starves. Good wine needs no bush. Better alone than in bad company. As you sow, you shall reap. Cut your coat according to your cloth. Cut your coat to suit your cloth. Shoemaker stick to your last. The more haste, the less speed. As the old cock crows, the young cock learns. Every day is not a holiday. Friends are known in time of need. Friends are like fiddle-strings; they must not be screwed too tight. He who pays well is master of another man's purse. It is easy to find a stick to beat a dog. Little thieves are hanged by the neck, great ones by the purse. Little thieves are hanged, but great ones escape. One hand washes the other, and both the face. When God will not, the saints cannot. Fine words don't fill the belly. One misfortune brings on another. When the old dog barks, he gives counsel. When the ox falls, there are many that will help to kill him. God deliver me from a man of one book. God deliver us from a gentleman by day and a friar by night. The grapes are sour, said the fox, when he could not get at them. The grass is always greener on the other side of the fence. When God pleases, it rains with every wind. Hands that give also receive. A beautiful thing is never perfect. A man's ruin lies in his tongue. Be patient with a bad neighbor:  he may move or face misfortune. Because we focused on the snake, we missed the scorpion. Bed is the poor man's opera. False ambition serves the neck. If there were no fault, there would be no pardon. Learn politeness from the impolite. Making money selling manure is better than losing money selling musk. Malice drinketh its own poison. Pride and dignity would belong to women if only men would leave them alone. Pride feels no pain. Pride goes before a fall. Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall. Put a rope around your neck and many will be happy to drag you along. Put a stout heart to a steep hill. Put a stout heart to a stey brae. Put by for a rainy day. Run as hard as a wild beast if you will, but you won't get any reward greater than that destined for you. The barking of a dog does not disturb the man on a camel. The tyrant is only the slave turned inside out. When the angels present themselves, the devils abscond. A black plum is as sweet as a white. A blind man will not thank you for a looking-glass. A cold April the barn will fill. A fair booty makes a fair thief. A full cup must be carried steadily. A goose quill is more dangerous than a lion's claw. A joy that's shared is a joy made double. A joyful evening may follow a sorrowful morning. A leap year is never a good sheep year. A maid who laughs is half taken. A man is as old as he feels himself to be. A man is as old as he feels, and a woman as old as she looks. A proverb is the child of experience. A shady lane breeds mud. A small family is soon provided for. A smooth sea never made a skilled mariner. A stumble may prevent a fall. Absence is a shrew. Absence sharpens love; presence strengthens it. Absence, and a friendly neighbor, washeth away love. Accusing the times is but excusing ourselves. Action is the proper fruit of knowledge. Actions speak louder than words. Advantage is a better soldier than rashness. Adventures are to the adventurous. A black hen lays a white egg. A ragged colt may make a good horse. All are not thieves that dogs bark at. All ask if a man be rich, no one if he be good. An idle brain is the devil's workshop. When Adam delved, and Eve span, where was then the gentleman? When all candles be out, all cats be gray. When all fruit fails, welcome haws. When all men say you are an ass, it is high time to bray. A good beginning makes a good ending. A lie has short legs. A life of leisure, and a life of laziness, are two things. Hasty climbers have sudden falls. He asked for bread and he received a stone. Here lies, not Rose the chaste, but Rose the fair!  Her scents no more perfume, but taint the air. May you have warmth in your igloo, oil in your lamp, and peace in your heart. May your charity increase as much as your wealth. Earth is dearer than gold. One cannot make soup out of beauty. The work will teach you how to do it. A blade won't cut another blade; a cheat won't cheat another cheat. A bleating sheep loses a bite. A cat may go to a monastery, but she still remains a cat. A fool and water will go the way they are diverted. A fool at forty is a fool indeed. A fool is thirsty in the midst of water. A silly daughter teaches her mother how to bear children. A single stick may smoke, but it will not burn. Advise and counsel him; if he does not listen, let adversity teach him. Evil enters like a needle and spreads like an oak tree. Evil gotten, evil spent. Give advice; if people don't listen, let adversity teach them. He who conceals his disease cannot expect to be cured. Move your neck according to the music. She who does not yet know how to walk cannot climb a ladder. Sitting is being crippled. The cattle is as good as the pasture in which it grazes. The coward sweats in water. The frog wanted to be as big as the elephant, and burst. The witness of a rat is another rat. What one hopes for is always better than what one has. When one is in love, a cliff becomes a meadow. When one is prepared, difficulties do not come. When spider webs unite, they can tie up a lion. When spiders unite, they can tie down a lion. One father is better at caring for ten children than ten children are for one father. Life is like this:  sometimes sun, sometimes rain. Each bay, its own wind. Idleness is to be dead at the limbs but alive within. Loyalty is more valuable than diamonds. God did not create hurry. If a man knew where he would fall, he would spread straw there first. The forest will answer you in the way you call to it. The water is the same on both sides of the boat. Honor is better than honors. What is said when drunk has been thought out beforehand. A bad compromise is better than a good lawsuit. A bad workman never finds a good tool. A beggar is never out of his road. A bellyful is a bellyful. A bellyfull of gluttony will never study willingly. A big nose never spoiled a handsome face. A blind hen can sometimes find her corn. A brain is worth little without a tongue. A cake and a bad custom ought to be broken. A cake eaten in peace, is worth two in trouble. A churl knows not the work of spurs (i.e., honour). A churl never liked a gentleman. A civil denial is better than a rude grant. A civil question deserves a civil answer. A clear conscience is a good pillow. A clown enriched knows neither relation nor friend. A colt is good for nothing if it does not break its halter. A colt you may break, but an old horse you never can. A courtier should be without feeling and without honour. A covetous woman deserves a swindling gallant. A cow does not know what her tail is worth until she has lost it. A cow from afar gives plenty of milk. A coward often deals a mortal blow to the brave. A coward's fear may make a coward valiant. A crooked log makes a good fire. When in doubt, Gallop! When in Rome, do as the Romans do. A fat kitchen makes a lean will. Big head, little wit. Bring up a raven, and he will peck out your eyes. He who spares vice wrongs virtue. Let him that itches scratch himself. Never seemed prison fair, or mistress foul. No money no Swiss. No moon, no man. No more teachers, no more books, no more teacher's dirty looks. No names, no pack-drill. One swallow does not make a spring. So many men, so many minds. So many men, so many opinions. So many mists in March, so many frosts in May. The higher the ape climbs the more he shows his rump. The monk responds as the abbot chants. The nearer the church the farther from God. Three removals are as bad as a fire. All the keys do not hang at one girdle. Make yourself a sheep and the wolf will eat you. Necessity has no law. One may buy gold too dear. One nail drives out another. The people's voice, God's voice. The person who has no opinion will seldom be wrong. What the eye sees not the heart rues not. Better bend than break. Never speak of a rope in the house of one who was hanged. Store is no sore. A goaded ass must trot. A man warned is as good as two. A sack was never so full but that it would hold another grain. A tender-hearted mother makes a scabby daughter. A white wall is the fool's paper. An old dog does not bark for nothing. Beauty and folly are often companions. Do what you ought, come what may. Drop by drop wears away the stone. Every medal has its reverse. Every miller draws the water to his own mill. Every monkey will have his gambols. Every one draws the water to his own mill. For a web begun God sends thread. Good swimmers are drowned at last. He is rich who owes nothing. He knocks boldly at the door who brings good news. He that reckons without his host must reckon again. He that refuseth praise the first time does it because he would have it the second. He that repairs not a part, builds all. He that rewards flattery, begs it. He that runs fast will not run long. Long tongue, short hand. No grass grows on a beaten road. No news is good news. After shaving there is nothing to shear. Everything must have a beginning. Hear, see, and say nothing if you would live in peace. Love and lordship like no fellowship. Marry your son when you please, your daughter when you can. No flies get into a shut mouth. Every one knows best where the shoe pinches him. The sheep that bleats loses a mouthful. An old ox makes a straight furrow. An old poacher makes the best gamekeeper. God helps him who helps himself. Harm watch, harm catch. He gives twice who gives in a trice. Nothing venture, nothing have. The higher the rise the greater the fall. The highest branch is not the safest roost. The tongue goes to where the tooth aches. Who knows most says least. A scalded cat dreads cold water. A scalded cat fears cold water. A word to the wise. Fair and softly goes far. Fair feathers make fair fowls. Fair flowers do not remain long by the wayside. Man is fire, woman is tow, and the devil comes and blows. A handsome hostess is bad for the purse. Nothing falls into the mouth of a sleeping fox. The better day the better deed. The mill does not grind with water that is past. The game is not worth the candle.  [Fr., Le jeu ne vaut pas la chandelle.] When a thing is done, advice comes too late. A good lawyer is a bad neighbour. Absent, none without blame; present, none without excuse. Every road leads to Rome. Forewarned is forearmed. He who eats the king's cow lean, pays for it fat. He who lies down with dogs gets up with fleas. Manual jokes are clown's jokes. Need makes the old woman trot. Old reckonings breed new disputes. Repentance costs dear. The eye of the master fattens the steed. There is a remedy for everything but death. There is a remedy for everything except death. What a woman wills God wills. What the she-wolf does (or brings forth) pleases the he-wolf. When the devil finds the door shut he goes away. Wine wears no breeches. Wine wears no mask. My son is my son till he have got him a wife,  But my daughter's my daughter all the days of her life. A bad reaper never gets a good sickle. A day's work--getting started. A friend by thee is better than a brother far off. A gossip's mouth is the devil's postbag. A man is known by the company he keeps. A man is known by the eye, and the face discovers wisdom. Avoid the evil, and it will avoid thee. Choose your company before you choose your drink. Do not judge by appearances; a rich heart may be under a poor coat. Do not light a fire that you cannot yourself put out. Do not look to the peaceful man for cudgels. Evil thoughts often come from idleness. He that will not look forward must look behind. He who would enjoy the fruit must not spoil the blossoms. If it is worth taking, it is worth asking for. Neither seek nor shun the fight. Peace is the well from which the stream of joy runs. Praise the fine day in the evening. Say but little and say it well. See that your own hearth is swept before you lift your neighbor's ashes. Some of the sweetest berries grow among the sharpest thorns. Some people make things happen, some watch things happen, while others wonder what has happened. The bitter cup we strive to remove from us holds the medicine we are most in need of. The coroner and the lawyer grow fat on the quarrels of fools. The lion is known by the scratch of his claws. A church stone drops gold. Friends and mules fail in hard trials. He that is unkind to his own will not be kind to others. He that is won with a nut, may be lost with an apple. He who plays with a sword plays with the devil. I see by my mother-in-law's eyes when the devil takes hold of her. The cow that does not eat with the oxen, either eats before or after them. The devil is fond of his own. The fox goes through the corn and does not eat, but brushes it down with his tail. The hen's eyes are where her eggs are. You a lady, I a lady, who is to put the sow out of doors? Before healing others, heal yourself. Light is half a companion. The cat which did not reach the sausage said:  Anyhow it is Friday. The cat would eat fish, but would not wet her feet. The eyeless ant asked God:  Give me eye-lashes. The rooster said, "I shall cry but whether the sun rises God knows." You cackle in our place but you lay your eggs at someone else's place. You can buy 'em but they don't stay bought. A bad beginning may make a good ending. A bad cause requires many words. A bad penny always comes back. A bad penny always turns up. A baptised Jew is a circumcised Christian. A bargain is a bargain. A bashful dog never fattens. A better seldom comes after. A blind horse goes straightforward. A blind leader of the blind. A blind man swallows many a fly. A bold does not always fall when it thunders. A bold onset is half the battle. A bolt does not always fall when it thunders. A cat has nine lives, as the onion seven skins. A cat in gloves catches no mice. A cat is a lion to mouse. A clean mouth and honest hand, will take a man through any land. A close mouth and open eyes never did any one harm. A close mouth catcheth no flies. A country can be judged by the quality of its proverbs. A dainty stomach beggars the purse. A danger foreseen is half avoided. A day after the fair. A doctor and a boor know more than a doctor alone. A golden bit makes none the better horse. An empty sack will not stand upright. Better aught than nought. Even counted sheep are eaten by the wolf. Every glowworm is not a fire. Fools grow without watering. Fools live poor to die rich. Good bargains empty the purse. He dances well to whom fortune pipes. He that is born to be hanged will never be drowned. He that is busy is tempted but by one devil, he that is idle by a legion. It is not enough to aim, you must hit. Liars should have good memories. Lies have short legs. One knife whets another. Saying and doing are two things. So many countries, so many customs. The best is the cheapest. The best is the enemy of the good. The cat loves fish, but is loth to wet her feet. The worst wheel creaks most. When the pear is ripe, it falls. Four eyes see more than two. A little spark kindles a great fire. God helps them that help themselves. What can't be cured, must be endured. Where friends, there riches. At night all cats are grey. It is an ill bird that fouls its own nest. Sloth is the key to poverty. Sloth is the mother of poverty. Slow but sure. Slow help is no help. A woman and a glass are always in danger. Better one-eyed than stone blind. Better play at small game than stand out. Children and fools speak the truth. Children and fools tell the truth. Good wine sells itself. Good wines needs no bush. The devil lurks behind the cross. The devil makes his Christmas pies of lawyers' tongues and clerk's fingers. Too many cooks spoil the broth. Too many irons in the fire. A crab does not beget a bird. A cracked bell can never sound well. By the time the fool has learned the game, the players have dispersed. Do not call the forest that shelters you a jungle. Fire and gunpowder do not sleep together. Hate has no medicine. Hunger is felt by a slave and hunger is felt by a king. If there were no elephant in the jungle, the buffalo would be a great animal. If things are getting easier, maybe you're headed downhill. It is the calm and silent water that drowns a man. It is the fool's sheep that break loose twice. No one tests the depth of the river with both feet. One camel does not make fun of another camel's hump. One falsehood spoils a thousand truths. Only when you have crossed the river can you say the crocodile has a lump on his snout. Rain wets a leopard's skin, but it does not wash out the spots. The ruin of a nation begins in the homes of its people. Two small antelopes can beat a big one. When a man is coming toward you, you need not say, "Come here." When a man is wealthy he may wear an old cloth. When a man's coat is threadbare, it is easy to pick a hole in it. When the cock is drunk, he forgets about the hawk. The hyena of your own country does not break your bones. Distant hills look beautiful; near ones are ugly. Fry the chapati when the pan is hot. The cobbler's gaze is on the feet. The hanging fruit is never too heavy for the creeper to bear. Truth is twelve years old. You cannot swallow hot milk, nor can you throw it away. A different man, a different taste. A gift, though small, is welcome. A library is a repository of medicine for the mind. A lucky person is someone who plants pebbles and harvests potatoes. A mad bull is not to be tied up with a packthread. A miser and a liar bargain quickly. A miser is ever in want. Act quickly, think slowly. After the war, aid. All things good to know are difficult to learn. An iron rod bends while it is hot. An open enemy is better than a false friend. Before you can score you must first have a goal. Character is habit long continued. Death is never at a loss for occasions. Eat and drink with your relatives; do business with strangers. Even from a foe a man may learn wisdom. First secure an independent income, then practice virtue. From a thorn comes a rose, and from a rose comes a thorn. Good accounts make good friends. Gray hair is a sign of age, not wisdom. Great abilities produce great vices as well as virtues. Great birth is a very poor dish at table. He who cannot bear misfortune is truly unfortunate. He who respects his parents never dies. Everyone is the age of their heart. It's not the fault of the parrot, but of the one who teaches him to talk. For news of the heart, ask the face. He who has done evil, expects evil. Save your fowl before it stops flapping. The man on his feet carries off the share of the man sitting down. The man who builds his own throne rules over a desert. The man who can't dance says the band can't play. A man must put grain in the ground before he can cut the harvest. May you have a lawsuit in which you know you are in the right. We do not inherit the earth from our ancestors; we borrow it from our children. A stumble is not a fall. An empty sack cannot stand up. Beat the dog; wait for its master. Beyond the mountain is another mountain. Children aren't dogs; adults aren't gods. Children have wide ears and long tongues. Children learn to creep ere they can learn to go. If someone sweats for you, you change his shirt. If work were good for you, the rich would leave none for the poor. If ye do wrang, mak amends. If you want your eggs hatched, sit on them yourself. Ignorance doesn't kill you, but it does make you sweat a lot. Poor people entertain with the heart. The child of a tiger is a tiger. The child saith nothing but what he heard at the fireside. The child says nothing, but what it heard by the fire. The crab that walks too far falls into the pot. The donkey sweats so the horse can be decorated with lace. The goat which has many owners will be left to die in the sun. The pencil of God has no eraser. When the cat's stomach is full, the rat's back is bitter. When the character of a man is not clear to you, look at his friends. He who feels no compassion will become insane. He who fights and runs away may live to fight another day. Lies are usually caused by undue fear of men. One who looks for a friend without faults will have none. The prosperity of a country is in accordance with its treatment of the aged. Abundance will make cotton pull a stone. Accomplishment of purpose is better than making a profit. Even silence speaks. Even sugar itself may spoil a good dish. Every fault is laid at the door of the hyena, but it does not steal a bale of cloth. If the owner of the goat is not afraid to travel by night, the owner of a hyena certainly will not be. If you do not agree with the phases of the moon, get a ladder and repair it. Man only ever scores nine out of ten. The cry of the hyena and the loss of the goat are one. When the hyena drinks, the dog can only look on. A coral reef hardens into land. Abuse is like a god that destroys his master. No one is hurt by doing the right thing. Paddle together, bail, paddle; paddle, bail; paddle towards the land. The Lehua blossom unfolds when the rains tread on it. The leopard does not change his spots. The rain follows after the forest. Those above are going down, those below are going up. Unite to move forward. The talker talks and causes death in his family. A little fire burns up a great deal of corn. A rich man has no need of character. Admission by the defendant is worth a hundred witnesses. An advantage of poverty:  your relatives gain nothing by your death. Do not confine your children to your own learning, for they were born in another time. Eat vegetables and fear no creditors, rather than eat duck and hide. God did not create woman from man's head, that he should command her, nor from his feet, that she should be his slave, but rather from his side, that she should be near his heart. Happy the generation where the great listen to the small, for it follows that in such a generation the small will listen to the great. He who takes his rank lightly raises his own dignity. If a word be worth one shekel, silence is worth two. Love him who tells you your faults in private. Make not a fence more expensive or more important than the thing that is fenced. Make not thy tail broader than thy wings.  [Keep not too many attendants.] Opinions founded on prejudice are always sustained with the greatest violence. People worry, and God smiles. Promise little and do much. Rivalry of scholars advances wisdom. Silence is a fence around wisdom. Silence is a fine jewel for a woman, but it is little worn. Silence is a woman's best garment. Slander slays three persons:  the speaker, the spoken to, and the spoken of. Teach thy tongue to say, "I do not know." Teach your grandam to spin. Teach your grandame to suck eggs. The court is most merciful when the accused is most rich. When anger comes, wisdom goes. A man in this world without learning is as a beast of the field. Among the blind, the squint rules. Anger has no eyes. Can the monkey know the taste of ginger? Can't tell his ass from a hole in the ground. Dig a well every day to drink water every day. Dig your well before you're thirsty. Eating while seated makes one of large size; eating while standing makes one strong. It is better to walk than to run; it is better to stand than to walk; it is better to sit than to stand; it is better to lie than to sit. Kill a cow to donate shoes. Many dogs kill a hare, no matter how many turns it makes. Of what use is the veil if you are going to dance. Saints fly only in the eyes of their disciples. Sleep after selling horses and elephants. These three take crooked ways:  carts, boats, and musicians. They who give have all things; they who withhold have nothing. Wash your hands in the flowing Ganges. Waste makes want. Waste not want not. When a camel is at the foot of a mountain then judge of his height. When an elephant is in trouble even a frog will kick him. Whose stick, his buffalo. Bathe early every day and sickness will avoid you. Dictators ride to and fro upon tigers which they dare not dismount. Diet cures more than the lancet. Give your ears to words but do not give your words to ears. It is a cart if it goes well, otherwise it is but timber. No sooner have you spoken than what you have said becomes the property of another. Once out of the throat it spreads over the world. The adult looks to deeds, the child to love. One finger can't lift a pebble. A flatterer is a secret enemy. A prudent man does not make the goat his gardener. A puff of wind and popular praise weigh alike. Adam ate the apple, and our teeth still ache. The believer is happy; the doubter is wise. The wife of a careless man is almost a widow. Never kill a man who says nothing. Never let any mechanical device know that you are in a hurry. All old sayings have something in them. Mediocrity is climbing molehills without sweating. Wrath often consumes what god gives husbands. Until lions have their own historians, tales of the hunt shall always glorify the hunter. A person who misses a chance and the monkey who misses its branch can't be saved. Agriculture is best, enterprise is acceptable, but avoid being on a fixed wage. Anger ends in cruelty. Blaming your faults on your nature does not change the nature of your faults. Blaw the wind ne'er so fast, it will lower at last. Call on God, but row away from the rocks. Don't bargain for fish which are still in the water. Don't judge any man until you have walked two moons in his moccasins. Don't just cross a river--cross it bearing fire!. Fate and self-help share equally in shaping our destiny. Garlic is as good as ten mothers. Keep five yards from a carriage, ten yards from a horse, and a hundred yards from an elephant; but the distance one should keep from a wicked man cannot be measured. Large desire is endless poverty. Life is not a continuum of pleasant choices, but of inevitable problems that call for strength, determination, and hard work. Only mad dogs and Englishmen go out in the noonday sun. Separation secures manifest friendship. September blow soft till the fruit's in the loft. Sit on the bank of a river and wait:  Your enemy's corpse will soon float by. The way to overcome the angry man is with gentleness, the evil man with goodness, the miser with generosity and the liar with truth. The weakest go to the wall. To the mediocre, mediocrity appears great. You can never enter the same river twice. You can often find in rivers what you cannot find in oceans. You can only lean against that which resists. Different fields, different grasshoppers; different seas, different fish. Different men have different opinions;  Some like apples, some onions. If you enter a goat stable, bleat; if you enter a water buffalo stable, bellow. Rippling water shows lack of depth. The shadow should be the same length as the body. The shallower the brook, the more it babbles. A blind person who sees is better than a seeing person who is blind. A gentle hand may lead even an elephant by a hair. Doubt is the key to knowledge. Doubt makes the mountain which faith can move. Doubtful the die, and dire the cast! Draw not thy bow before thy arrow be fixed. Drawn wells have sweetest water. A blind man can see his mouth. A buckle is a great addition to an old shoe. A cabin with plenty of food is better than a hungry castle. A dimple in the chin; a devil within. A disease known is half cured. A dog with two homes is never any good. A fast is better than a bad meal. A good laugh and a long sleep are the best cures in the doctor's book. A good retreat is better than a bad stand. A good servant makes a good master. A hut is a palace to the poor man. A lock is better than suspicion. A man is often a bad adviser to himself and a good adviser to another. A narrow neck keeps the bottle from being emptied in one swig. A new broom sweeps clean, but an old broom knows the corners. A nod is as good as a wink to a blind horse. A nod's as good as a wink to a blind horse. A quarrel is like buttermilk:  once it's out of the churn, the more you shake it, the more sour it grows. A quiet tongue shows a wise head. A scholar's ink lasts longer than a martyr's blood. A silent mouth is sweet to hear. A sly rogue is often in good dress. A small benefit obtained is better than a great one in expectation. A trade not properly learned is an enemy. A trout in the pot is better than a salmon in the sea. To you your religion and to me my religion. A bad agreement is better than a good lawsuit. A barking cur does not bite. A barking dog never bites. A beautiful woman smiling, bespeaks a purse weeping. A beetle is a beauty in the eyes of his mother. A bird in the cage is worth a hundred at large. A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. A blind man is not judge of colours. A book whose sale's forbidden all men rush to see, and prohibition turns one reader into three. A braying ass eats little hay. A calm portends a storm. A candle loses nothing by lighting another candle. A cat pent up becomes a lion. A cat that licks the spit is not to be trusted with roast meat. A clear bargain, a dear friend. A cloak is not made for a single shower of rain. A closed mouth catches no flies. A cracked pot never fell off the hook. A cur's tail grows fast. A dead man does not make war. A dog is never offended at being pelted with bones. A dog never bit me but I had some of his hair. A dog that bites silently.  [An insidious tradcuer.  He would kill you with an air-gun.] A drop of water breaks a stone. A drowning man would catch at razors. A liar is sooner caught than a cripple. A word to the wise is enough. Better gain in mud than lose in gold. Do good, and care not to whom. Grief for a dead wife lasts to the door. Grief pent up will burst the heart. In at one ear and out at the other. Make yourself honey and the flies will eat you. The father a saint the son a devil. What is bought is cheaper than a gift. When the wine is in, the wit is out. A guest and a fish stink in three days. Get a good name and go to sleep. Get a name to rise early, and you may lie all day. He is a fool who thinks that another does not think. He is a good dog who goes to church. Speak not ill of the year until it is past. Speak not of my debts unless you mean to pay them. The dog wags his tail, not for you, but for your bread. Where the river is deepest it makes the least noise. Where the wolf gets one lamb he looks for another. A beard well lathered is half shaved. Absence is a foe to love; away from the eyes, away from the heart. Associate with the good and you will be one of them. Assurance is two-thirds success. Call me not olive before you see me gathered. Call no man happy till he dies. Call not a surgeon before you are wounded. Fear guards the vineyard. He preaches well who lives well. He who has a glass roof should not throw stones at his neighbour's. Love me love my dog. None so deaf as he that will not hear. Since the house is on fire, let us warm ourselves. The bell does not go to mass, and yet calls every one to it. The devil turns away from a closed door. The feast passes and the fool remains. The gallows was made for the unlucky. The gallows will have its own at last. The hare starts from where it is least expected. The mouse does not leave the cat's house with a bellyful. There is no worse joke than a true one. Water past will not turn the mill. Where there's a will there's a way. Who has nothing fears nothing. We decide our affairs, then we rest them with God. Cows have no business in horseplay. If you saw what the river carried, you would never drink the water. Keep your secret in your own gourdy. Keep your shop and your shop will keep you. Make a friend when you don't need one. No call alligator long mouth till you pass him. Sleep has no master. Those who can't dance say the music is no good. Words in mouth, no load upon head. You shake man's hand, you no shake his heart. A fog cannot be dispelled by a fan. A good husband is healthy and absent. A good Jack makes a good Jill. A good sword is the one left in its scabbard. A man in love mistakes a pimple for a dimple. A mended lid to a cracked pan. A merchants happiness hangs upon chance, winds, and waves. A merry companion on the road is as good as a nag. A pig used to dirt turns its nose up at rice. A round egg can be made square according to how you cut it; words would be harsh according to how you speak them. A single arrow is easily broken, but not ten in a bundle. Adversity is the foundation of virtue. Affinity is a mysterious thing, but it is spicy! Afraid of his own shadow. After victory, tighten your helmet chord. All married women are not wives. An accomplishment sticks to a person. An excess of courtesy is discourtesy. An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. Bad and good are intertwined like rope. Beat your wife on the wedding day, and your married life will be happy. Beaten with his own rod. Better go without medicine than call in an unskilled physician. Darkness reigns at the foot of the lighthouse. Deceive the rich and powerful if you will, but don't insult them. A half-truth is a whole lie. Among those who stand, do not sit; among those who sit, do not stand.  Among those who laugh, do not weep; among those who weep, do not laugh. Anyone who teases you loves you. Ask about your neighbors, then buy the house. Be sure to send a lazy man for the angel of death. Be the day weary or be the day long, at last it ringeth to evensong. Do not ask questions of fairy tales. Do not make yourself so big, you are not so small. Do not meet troubles half-way. Don't be too sweet lest you be eaten up; don't be too bitter lest you be spewed out. Don't live in a town where there are no doctors. Don't look a gift horse in the mouth. Don't make a mountain out of a molehill. Don't make a toil of pleasure. Don't open a shop unless you know how to smile. Don't pick a wasp out of a cream-jug. God could not be everywhere and therefore he made mothers. God gives burdens also shoulders. He who puts up with insult invites injury. If God lived on earth, people would break his windows. If the rich could hire someone else to die for them, the poor would make a wonderful living. If you can't go over, you must go under. In a restaurant choose a table near a waiter. Look for the good, not the evil, in the conduct of members of the family. Make sure to be in with your equals if you're going to fall out with your superiors. Agreement with two people, lamentation with three. Eleven persons take eleven paths. Empty vessels make much noise. Giving advice to a stupid man is like giving salt to a squirrel. I bought the nettle, sowed the nettle, and then the nettle stung me. Ignorance is the peace of life. No strength within, no respect without. No sunshine but hath some shadow. No sweet without sweat. O daughter, I'm telling you.  O daughter-in-law, listen to it. One and one are sometimes eleven. One man can burn water, whereas another cannot even burn oil. One man cut the barrage, and a thousand people fell into the river. One man's beard is on fire, and another man warms his hands on it. One man's breath's another man's death. Saving mustard seeds in hand, while a watermelon escapes. Service is greatness. The customers are known to the shopkeepers. The danger past, and God forgotten. The fall is nobody's sire. The gardener had not yet dug out the radish, when the beggar held the alms-bowl in front of him. When pumpkins are watered, brinjals [small plants] also get watered. When rogues fallout, honest men come by their own. A slave has no choice. How easy it is to defeat people who do not kindle fire for themselves. How gently glides the married life away,  When she who rules still seems but to obey. A donkey always says thank you with a kick. A person changing his clothing always hides while changing. All cassavahs have the same skins but not all taste the same. Because a man has injured your goat, do not go out and kill his bull. Having a good discussion is like having riches. He who is unable to dance says the yard is stony. Hurrying has no blessing. Nobody gathers firewood to roast a thin goat. We have not inherited this land from our ancestors; rather we have borrowed it from our children. You may laugh at a friend's roof; don't laugh at his sleeping accommodation. Two smells of cooking meat break the hyena's legs. Man counts what he has refused, not what he has given. A running man can slit a thousand throats in one night. Act and you shall have dinner.  Think and you shall be dinner. A kitchen knife cannot carve its own handle. A nobleman's calf does not know how a butcher kills. Carve the peg by looking at the hole. Cast no dirt into the well that gives you water. Cast not pearls to swine. Catch not at the shadow, and lose the substance. Cross even a stone bridge after you've tested it. Even a fish wouldn't get into trouble if it kept its mouth shut. Even children of the same mother look different. If there is a rich man in the area three villages are ruined. If you starve for three days, there is no thought that does not invade your imagination. Man's affairs are evaluated only after his coffin is closed. Man's extremity, God's opportunity. Put off for one day and ten days will pass. The bad plowman quarrels with his ox. The deeper the waters are, the more still they run. Where there are no tigers, a wildcat is very self-important. Words have no wings but they can fly a thousand miles. You will hate a beautiful song if you sing it often. A visitor comes with ten blessings, eats one, and leaves nine. Do not throw the arrow which will return against you. Fear an ignorant man more than a lion. For every wise man there is one still wiser. Give nine, save ten. Guests bring good luck with them. Habit becomes second nature. Habit is worse than rabies. In a flat country a hillock thinks itself a mountain. It is easier to make a camel jump a ditch than to make a fool listen to reason. It is more difficult to contend with oneself than with the world. Kind words will unlock an iron door. Listen a hundred times; ponder a thousand times; speak once. Many will show you the way once your cart has overturned. Many women, many words. No matter where you go, your destiny follows you. No means, no market. Of everything else the newest; of friends, the oldest. Of evil grain no good seed can come. Once a friend, always a friend. One beats one's breast who does not beat one's child. Part with your head, but not with your secret. Parting is such sweet sorrow. See with your mind, hear with your heart. Stairs are climbed step by step. Rags to riches to rags. Rain before seven, fine before eleven. If you like things easy, you'll have difficulties; if you like problems, you'll succeed. Live with vultures, become a vulture; live with crows, become a crow. A bad father has never a good son. A beardless boy would teach old men! A beaten track is a safe one. A bird is distinguished by its note. A biting cur wears a torn skin. A blockhead, a dolt, a donkey, a leaden-headed fellow. A blow from a frying-pan blacks, though it may not hurt. A bow too much bent is broken. A busybody is always malevolent. A captive they insult with impunity. A carpenter is known by his chips. A cautious man will observe the indications of character which nature reveals in others. A chain is no stronger than its weakest link. A chain is only as strong as its weakest link. A chair unsound  Soon finds the ground. A child may have too much of his mother's blessing. A clear conscience is a wall of brass. A combined defence is the safest. A common blot is held no stain. A common shipwreck is a consolation to all. A constant guest is never welcome. A contented man is always rich. A contented mind is a continual feast. A cough assists a musician when he hesitates. A cough will stick longer by a horse than a peck of oats. A ploughman on his legs is higher than a gentleman on his knees. Bend the willow while it is young. Benefits grow old betimes, but injuries are long livers. Benefits please like flowers, when they are fresh. Benefits, like flowers, please most when they are fresh. Live according to your means. There is nothing new under the sun. What the sober man has in his heart, the drunkard has on his lips. One fool makes many. Opportunity makes the thief. Opportunity never knocks twice at any man's door. Opportunity only knocks once. Where the bee sucks honey the spider sucks poison. Many hands make light work. When an old dog barks, look out. What you are doing do thoroughly. Spur not a willing horse. The end crowns the work. The end justifies the means. Boldly ventured is half won. Boldness in business is the first, second, and third thing. Bolt a door with a boiled carrot! Experience is the best teacher. Hunger is the best cook. One hand washes the other. Practise not your art, and 'twill soon depart. Praise a fair day at night. Soon ripe, soon rotten. The eagle does not catch flies. Truth may be suppressed, but not strangled. Practice makes perfect. Never refuse a good offer. The same shoe does not fit every foot. The master's eye makes the horse fat. A smiling face is half the meal. He who has money can eat sherbet in hell. His brains hang at the top of his fez. If anyone is not willing to accept your point of view, try to see his point of view. If at first you don't succeed, try, try, try again. Lock your door rather than accuse your neighbor. Lower your voice and strengthen your argument. The worst ache is the present ache. We traded in shrouds; people stopped dying. In case of doubt it is best to lean to the side of mercy. Do not look where you fell, but where you slipped. If the townspeople are happy, look for the chief. If the walls were adamant, gold would take the town. A silent pig digs the deepest root. God gave teeth; He will give bread. Offer the lazy an egg, and they'll want you to peel it for them. Without learning, without eyes. Without pains no gains. He who searches for pearls should not sleep. A bird which eats berries can be caught, but not a bird that eats wood. A brave man who climbs trees is food for their roots. In a very old tree, you may be certain that the sapwood is on the outside, while the heartwood is in the middle. Let someone else acknowledge your virtues. Many stars cannot be concealed by a small cloud. Only the foolish visit the land of the cannibals. Persist as resolutely as you persist in eating. The block of wood should not dictate to the carver. The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church. The more you ask how much longer it will take, the longer the journey seems. The dog's bark is not might but fright. A canoe does not know who is king.  When it turns over, everyone gets wet. An egg does not fight a rock. Disgraced like a man whose own pet bites him. Do not kick away the canoe which helped you to cross the river. Do not scare the birds you are going to shoot. Do not treat your loved one like a swinging door:  you are fond of it but you push it back and forth. Iron does not clang by itself. Roosters' tail feathers:  pretty but always behind. The lazy man who goes to borrow a spade says, "I hope I will not find one." You think you are strong like the corn plant, yet the bean vine is already choking you. Anger is a stone cast into a wasp's nest. Anger is as a stone cast into a wasp's nest. Anger is more hurtful than the injury that caused it. A patient that can swallow food makes the nurse doubtful. By getting angry, you show you are wrong. Cross in a crowd and the crocodile won't eat you. Crosses are ladders that lead to heaven. Crosses are ladders which lead to heaven. Crows are black everywhere. Crows are never the whiter for washing themselves. Crows bewail the dead sheep, and then eat them. Distracted by what is far away, he does not see his nose. Do not be like a miser who saves for those who will bury him. Done in by his own trade like a water merchant in the rain. It is better to refuse than to accept and not to go. Nothing is so difficult that diligence cannot master it. Nothing is so full of victory as patience. One does not like hot, the other does not like cold; make it tepid to make an agreement. Poverty won't allow him to lift up his head; dignity won't allow him to bow it down. Power corrupts. Sick people are like kings. Sorrow is like rice in an attic:  you use a little every day and at the end it is all gone. Words are like eggs:  when they are hatched they have wings. A fool is like the big drum that beats fast but does not realize its hollowness. An ox with long horns, even if he does not butt, will be accused of butting. An unasked excuse infers transgression. Ants die in sugar. Clapping with the right hand only will not produce a noise. If there is no reason, why would the tempua bird nest on the low branches? If you have, give; if you lack, seek. One can pay back the loan of gold, but one dies forever in debt to those who are kind. Smack a tray of water and you get to wash your face. The existence of the sea means the existence of pirates. The more shoots, the more leaves. The more sorrow one encounters, the more joy one can contain. To bend a bamboo, start when it is a shoot. Where there is sugar, there are bound to be ants. You can't get at the precious sago without first breaking the bark. Don't think there are no crocodiles because the water is calm. One who sits by the well will never go thirsty. Though a tree grow ever so high, the falling leaves return to the ground. Though a tree grows so high, the falling leaves return to the root. Though change be no robbery. Trumpet in a herd of elephants; crow in the company of cocks; bleat in a flock of goats. Don't use an axe to embroider. Fear to let fall a drop and you will spill a lot. Feasting is the physician's harvest. The body pays for a slip of the foot, and gold pays for a slip of the tongue. One does not give without a motive. A cry, a sniff, and all comes to naught. A cup must be bitter that a smile will not sweeten. A kiss without a hug is like a flower without the fragrance. An oven whose door does not shut does not bake its loaves. Charm is stronger than beauty. Chasten thy son while there is hope. Death rights everything. Death said to the man with his throat cut, "How ugly you look." Enjoy yourself, for there is nothing in the world we can call our own. Far from the eye, far from the heart. I am dead.  It is as if everybody were dead.  Let the man left behind shut the door if he wants to. Mountain does not meet mountain, but a face meets another face. No one takes away anything with him. One man's death is another man's life. One man's fault is another man's lesson. Only death is certain. Only fools and horses work. The good cow gets sold in its own country. The good die first:  And those, whose hearts are dry as summer dust,    Burn to the socket. The good die young. The wallet of the timid man neither increases nor decreases. Time gives good advice. Today me, tomorrow you. Today you; tomorrow me. We are all equal before death. Learning is a golden urn that can never be stolen. The land is a mother that never dies. Turn your face to the sun and the shadows fall behind you. Chickens don't praise their own soup. Child's pig, father's pork. Pots take turns to sit on the fire. The cow has no owner. The elephant does not get tired of its tusks. You cannot tickle a hungry person. If you hear hoof beats, look for horses, not zebras. A person born to be a flower pot will not go beyond the porch. It's not the fault of the mouse, but of the one who offers him the cheese. The house does not rest upon the ground, but upon a woman. The right time to dine is:  for the rich man, when he is hungry; and for the poor, when he has something to eat. We were born to die anyhow. Winter either bites with its teeth or lashes with its tail. Winter finds out what summer lays up. Every beetle is a gazelle in the eyes of its mother. If a person is away, his right is away. Repentance for silence is better than repentance for speaking. A stone from the hand of a friend is an apple. Abundance of money is a trial for a man. Among walnuts only the empty one speaks. An agreement is a kind of debt. An old cat will not learn how to dance. Either do as your neighbors do, or move away. If a man leaves little children behind him, it is as if he did not die. If a man once fall, all will tread on him. If you are a peg, endure the knocking; if you are a mallet, strike. Instruction in youth is like engraving in stone. Little by little, the camel goes into the couscous. The falcon does not struggle when he is caught. The pumpkin gives birth and the fence has the trouble. The quarrel of lovers is the renewal of love. The tar of my country is better than the honey of others. Work and you will be strong; sit and you will stink. The learned are apt to be taciturn. The least and weakest man can do some hurt. The least boy always carries the biggest fiddle. Only the mountains never meet. Only the strong survive. Listen or your tongue will keep you deaf. Tell me and I'll forget. Show me, and I may not remember.  Involve me, and I'll understand. What the people believe is true. Life is not separate from death. It only looks that way. If you see no reason for giving thanks, the fault lies in yourself. You can't wake a person who is pretending to be asleep. You can't win them all. Every animal knows more than you do. Do not wrong or hate your neighbor for it is not he that you wrong but yourself. Do right and fear no man. Do unto others as you would be done unto. Do unto others as you would they should do unto you. A people without history is like wind on the buffalo grass. Man has responsibility, not power. After dark all cats are leopards. A man can't get rich if he takes proper care of his family. Wealth is both an enemy and a friend. The forest is the poor man's overcoat. A man does not wander far from where his corn is roasting. A rat is not born a rabbit. A tiger does not have to proclaim its tigritude. A traveler to distant places should make no enemies. A tree does not move unless there is wind. A tree is best measured when it's down. A tree is known by its fruit. An old man is there to talk. Fine words do not produce food. "Give me a push from my back" does not mean give me a hunchback. If a blind man says, "Let's throw stones," be assured that he has stepped on one. If a monkey is amongst dogs, why won't it start barking. If crocodiles eat their own eggs, what would they do to the flesh of a frog? If death be terrible, the fault is not in death, but thee. If one finger brought oil it soiled others. If you fail to take away a strong man's sword when he is on the ground, will you do it when he gets up? It is the fear of offence that makes men swallow poison. It is the first step that is difficult. It takes a village to raise a child. It takes all sorts to make a world. No sane person sharpens his machete to cut a banana tree. Not to know is bad; not to wish to know is worse. Not to know the good we have  Till time has stolen the cherish'd gift away,    Is cause of half the misery that we feel,      And makes the world the wilderness it is. Not to oversee workmen, is to leave your purse open. One goat cannot carry another goat's tail. Necessity never made a good bargain. You cannot unscramble eggs. You cannot weld cake-dough to cast iron, nor a girl to an old man. Everybody's friend is true to none. Gather and spare can last long. Given counsel is all the same hard to take. Heroism consists of hanging on one minute longer. If the glacier perceives a headless army is clumsy, it feels a sort of emphatic guilt, I dare say. In every woman there is a Queen.  Speak to the Queen and the Queen will answer. It's no shame to look into the warm spring sun and regret a lost limb. It's too bad to want a thing and not be allowed it. It's too late to shut the stable door after the horse has bolted. On the road between the homes of friends, grass does not grow. Poor thanks is the way of the world. Rather a bit correctly than much incorrectly. Rather free in a foreign place than a slave back home. Shameful deeds bring on revenge. The afterthought is good, but forethought is better. The age of miracles is past. The lame man runs if he has to. The lowest fence is the easiest to get across. The shame you can't lift away, you had better let lie. There's no shame in clothing you haven't cut yourself. What's good is often forgotten; what's bad is often hidden. You can give a piece of advice, but not good luck along with that. You don't have to put out the fire when all is burnt out. Be as hard as the world requires you to be, and as soft as the world allows you to be. If you wish your merit to be known, acknowledge that of other people. You cannot avoid what lies in ambush for you. Away from the eye, away from the mind. Do good and throw it in the sea. Do good if you expect to receive it. Do not drink from a well and throw a stone into it. Do not drink poison to quench a thirst. Every eye has its look. Every sheep is hung by its own leg. Nobody will plough the land except its cows. Nobody's perfect. The empty gives way to the full. The eye cannot rise above the eyebrow. The eye is the one that eats. The eye of a master does more work than both his hands. The eye sees, but the hand can't reach. The eye will often wander  The road that love has taught. The ignorant is his own enemy. Whatever is written on the forehead is always seen. Whatever man had done, man may do. You will not dare mistreat the face you see in the morning. Your close neighbor is better than your faraway brother. If you buy things you don't need, you'll soon be selling things you do. A bad wound heals but a bad word doesn't. A broken hand works, but not a broken heart. A broken sleeve holdeth the arm back. A stone thrown at the right time is better than gold given at the wrong time. A thief is a king till he's caught. A thief knows a thief as a wolf knows a wolf. Be a lion at home and a fox abroad. By a sweet tongue and kindness, you can drag an elephant with a hair. Courteous men learn courtesy from the discourteous. Courtesie is cumbersome to them that ken it not. Courtesy on one side can never last long. Do little things now; so shall big things come to thee by and by asking to be done. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Do well the little things now; so shall great things come to thee by and by asking to be done. Epigrams succeed where epics fail. Every man goes down to his death bearing in his hands only that which he has given away. Go and wake up your luck. Go as far as you can see, and when you get there you'll see further. Go further and fare worse. He gives a party with bath-water. He gives him roast meat and beats him with the spit. He who want a rose must respect the thorn. He who wants a rose must respect the thorn. He who wants content can't find an easy chair. I used to feel sorry for myself because I had no shoes until I met a man who was dead. Alertness and courage are life's shield. Don't empty the water jar until the rain falls. He who boasts of his accomplishments will heap ridicule on himself. He who gives alms to the poor faces heaven. It is advantageous to follow advice, for you will succeed in life. The pain of the little finger is felt by the whole body. A good appetite needs no sauce. A good bargain is a pick-purse. A good painter need not give a name to his picture, a bad one must. A guest sees more in an hour than the host in a year. A noisy cow gives little milk. A poor dancer will be disturbed even by the hem of her skirt. All times are good when old. Do not push the river, it will flow by itself. Even a clock that does not work is right twice a day. Even the goats will jump on a slanted tree. Every error has its excuse. Fish, to taste good, must swim three times: in water, in butter, and in wine. God grant me a good sword and no use for it. Hunger will lead a fox out of the forest. Hungry bellies have no ears. Ink, if not used, will dry up. Innocence itself sometimes hath need of a mask. Innocence plays in the backyard of ignorance. Love enters a man through his eyes, woman through her ears. Never seek the wind in the field.  It is useless to try and find what is gone. Nowadays you must go to heaven to meet an angel. On a thief, the hat's on fire. The doctor demands his fees whether he has killed the illness or the patient. The greater love is a mother's; then comes a dog's; then a sweetheart's. The greatest love is a mother's, then a dog's, then a sweetheart's. A bad knife cuts one's finger instead of the stick. A barking dog was never a good hunter. A barley corn is better than a diamond to a cock. A beard lathered is half shaved. A beard once washed is half shaven. A beggar's wallet is never full. A bustling mother makes a slothful daughter. A contented ass enjoys a long life. A dead man does not speak. A dog in the manger, that neither eats nor lets others eat. A dull ass near home trots without the stick. A fast horse does not want the spur. A fault confessed is half forgiven. A fault confessed is half redressed. A finger's length in a sword, and a palm in a lance, are a great advantage. A friend is to be taken with his faults. A friend's fault should be known but not abhorred. A full man is no eater. A girl, a vineyard, an orchard, and a bean-field, are hard to watch. A good cock was never fat. A good thing is known when it is lost. A good thing is soon caught up. A good word quenches more than a cauldron of water. A good year is determined by its spring. A goose cannot graze after him. The bad neighbour gives a needle without thread. A capon eight months old is fit for a king's table. A fair-weather friend changes with the wind. A long tongue betokens a short hand. A looker on sees more of the game than a player. A sharp tooth for hard bread. All are not soldiers who go to the wars. Another's bread costs dear. Better have a bad ass than be your own ass. Between smith and smith no money passes. Between the hand and the mouth the soup is lost. Beware of a bad woman, and put no trust in a good one. Bleed him, purge him, and if he dies, bury him. Blessed are the dead that the rain rains on. Blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed. Cheat me in the price and not in the goods. Every cask smells of the wine it contains. Every cloud has a silver lining. Every hair casts its shadow. Every one stretches his legs according to the length of his coverlet. Every pedlar praises his own needles. God give you luck, my son, for little wit must serve your turn. Good news is rumoured and bad news flies. Grain by grain the hen fills her crop. Grasp all, lose all. Grasp no more than thy hand will hold. Although the monkey might dress in silk, monkey it still is. Always a bridesmaid, never a bride. Calling the devil is not the same as seeing him come. Sleeping shrimp gets taken by the current. The monkey knows the tree it climbs. Many a man digs his grave with his teeth. The Italian seemes wise, and is wise; the Spaniard seemes wise, and is a foole; the French seems a foole, and is wise; and the English seemes a foole and is a foole. In wine there is truth. Thou too art mortal. All roads lead to Rome. All saint without, all devil within. A bad workman quarrels with his tools. A barber learns to shave by shaving fools. A creaking door hangs long on its hinges. A creaking door hangs longest. Abundance, like want, ruins many. Adversity makes a man wise, not rich. An ass is but an ass, though laden with gold. Better a mouse in the pot than no meat at all. Do not cut the bough you are sitting on. Do not put your spoon into the pot which does not boil for you. Do not rake up old grievances. Eating and scratching want but a beginning. Fortune is made of glass. God gives the milk, but not the pail. If you wish good advice, consult an old man. Knotty timber must have sharp wedges. Knotty timber requires sharp wedges. Long absent, soon forgotten. Long and lazy, little and loud; fat and fulsome, pretty and proud. Many bring their clothes to church rather than themselves. One foot is better than two crutches. One who sits between two chairs may easily fall down. The anvil fears no blows. The goat must browse where she is tied. There is no going to heaven in a sedan. Our last garment is made without pockets. Only fools are glad when governments change. A cat always knows whose meat it eats. A drop hollows out a stone. A fly cannot enter a closed mouth. A good citizen owes his life to his country. A guest has not to thank the host, but the host the guest. A kind word is like a Spring day. A lonely person is at home everywhere. A long pull and a strong pull and a pull altogether. A man is judged by his deeds, not by his words. A mile walk with a friend has only one hundred steps. A net will catch more than a pole. A priest's belly is made up of several sheepskins. A proverb can't be judged. A wife is not a pot, she will not break so easily. A word of kindness is better than a fat pie. Absentmindedness is searching for the horse you are riding. Abuse doesn't hang on the collar. Acknowledgement is half of correction. All ages are submissive to love. All are not cooks who walk with long knives. All lay loads on a willing horse. An egg is dear on Easter day. An enemy will agree, but a friend will argue. An indispensable thing never has much value. Any sandpiper is great in his own swamp. In a court of fowls, the cockroach never wins his case. In a fiddler's house, all are dancers. You can outdistance that which is running after you, but not what is running inside you. You can take a horse to water, but you can't make him drink. You can take the boy out of the country but you can't take the country out of the boy. The person with burnt fingers asks for tongs. To know and to act are one and the same. A woman's appetite is twice that of a man's; her sexual desire, four times; her intelligence, eight times. All we can hold in our cold dead hands is what we have given away. He who allows his day to pass by without practicing generosity and enjoying life's pleasures is like a blacksmith's bellows:  he breathes but does not live. If you forsake a certainty and depend on an uncertainty, you will lose both the certainty and the uncertainty. If you gently touch a nettle it'll sting you for your pains; grasp it like a lad of mettle, an' as soft as silk remains. Sorrow for the death of a father lasts six months; sorrow for a mother, a year; sorrow for a wife, until another wife; sorrow for a son, forever. Yesterday is but a dream, tomorrow but a vision.  But today well lived makes every yesterday a dream of happiness, and every tomorrow a vision of hope.  Look well, therefore, to this day. If the camel once get his nose in a tent, the body will soon follow. If the cap fits, wear it. I have so much to do that I am going to bed. Go often to the house of a friend; for weeds soon choke up the unused path. It is the great north wind that made the Vikings. It is the last straw that breaks the camel's back. Ane's ain hearth is goud's worth. He behoves to have meal enou, that sal stop ilka man's mou'. He braks my head, an' syne puts on my hoo. Meikle crack fills nae sack. A man is a lion in his own cause. A tale never loses in the telling. Be happy while you're living, For you're a long time dead. Be slow in choosing a friend, but slower in changing him. Better be ill spoken of by one before all than by all before one. Confessed faults are half mended. Confession is good for the soul. Don't marry for money, you can borrow it cheaper. Egotism is an alphabet of one letter. Either a man or a mouse. Fools look to tomorrow.  Wise men use tonight. Get what you can and keep what you have; that's the way to get rich. Learn young, learn fair; learn old, learn more. Luck never gives; it only lends. Never draw your dirk when a blow will do it. Never let your feet run faster than your shoes. Never marry for money.  You can borrow it cheaper. Open confession is good for the soul. Take care of your pennies and your dollars will take care of themselves. The day has eyes, the night has ears. The devil's boots don't creak. There never came ill of good advisement. They are good that are away. They talk of my drinking but never my thirst. They that dance must pay the fiddler. An intelligent enemy is worth more than a stupid friend. Haste and hurry can only bear children with many regrets along the way. If a centipede loses a leg, it does not prevent him from walking. If the dog is not at home, he barks not. If the eye do not admire, the heart will not desire. It is better to be loved than feared. It is better to walk fast than to grow angry at the forest. Lies that build are better than truths that destroy. Little by little, one catches the monkey in the jungle. People are man's medicine. The chameleon changes color to match the earth, the earth doesn't change color to match the chameleon. The frog likes water, but not boiling water. When a mouse makes fun of a cat, there is a hole. When a musician hath forgotten his note,  He makes as though a crumb stuck in his throat. A foolish fox is caught by one leg, but a wise one by all four. A greedy father has thieves for children. A greedy man God hates. A thorn pierces young skin more quickly than old. Good deeds are the best prayer. The glory of ancestors should not prevent a man winning glory for himself. If sorrow would not talk it would die. If strokes are good to give, they are good to receive. Do not bathe if there is no water. A person eating must make crumbs. A piece of meat with eyes. A rock offered by a friend is like an apple. Crooked wood is straightened with fire. Keep watch for the appearing mushroom. Pee on the ruins before they build a temple over them. That fellow roasts his fish in the flames of a fire. That grief is light which is capable of counsel. The barking of dogs does not reach heaven. The fellow roasts his fish in the flames of a fire. The female of the species is more deadly than the male. The living who is absent is like a dead man. The pardon arrives after the man was hung. The war is lost for too much advice. Walk with your slippers until you can find your shoes. Watch out for the unexpected mushroom. We keep an eye on the scorpion and the serpent, but we do not watch out for the millipede. You can't have meat without the bone. Do not tell the man who is carrying you that he stinks. I grew up among wise men and found that there is nothing better for man than silence. Knowledge is not the main thing, but deeds. Knowledge without practice makes but half an artist. The big fish is caught with big bait. The cow must graze where she is tied. The elephant's head is no load for a child. By committing foolish acts, one learns wisdom. Eat coconuts while you have teeth. Even the fall of a dancer is a somersault. If you had teeth of steel, you could eat iron coconuts. Don't shake the tree when the pears fall off themselves. All roads do not lead to Rome. Pray for a good harvest, but keep on hoeing. Speak the truth, but leave immediately after. Where I make my living, there is my home. Walls have ears, and little pots too. A bad compromise is better than a successful suit. A bad day never hath a good night. A bad excuse is better than none. A bad labour, and a daughter after all. A bad man's gift is like his master. A bad mother wishes for good children. A bad thing never dies. A bad wound may be cured, bad repute kills. A barking dog was never a good biter. A bespattered hog tries to bespatter another. A blind man's stroke, which raises a dust from beneath water. A blind man's wife needs no paint. A blow from a frying-pan, if it does not hurt, smuts. A blow with a reed makes a noise but hurts not. A boaster and a liar are cousins. A boy's love is water in a sieve. A buffeting threatened is never well given. A bully is always a coward. A buxom widow must be married, buried, or cloistered. A child of a year old sucks milk from the heel. A covetous abbot for one offering loses a hundred. A cracked bell will never be sound. A crazy vessel never falls from the hand. A daily guest is a thief in the kitchen. A determined heart will not be counselled. He who denies all confesses all. Drink nothing without seeing it, sign nothing without reading it. A termite can do nothing to a stone but lick it. There wouldn't be such a thing as counterfeit gold if there were no real gold somewhere. We do not walk on our legs, but on our will. We don't kill a pig every day. If you lie and then tell the truth, the truth will be considered a lie. If a person shave you with a razor, do not shave him with broken glass. Faith is confirmed by the heart, confessed by the tongue, and acted upon by the body. Abuses are the result of seeing one another too often. Accidents will happen. Aiming isn't hitting. Haste does not result in prosperity. Haste is from the Devil. Haste makes waste and waste makes want. If the hyena eats the sick man, he will eat the whole one. A peacock has too little in its head, too much in its tail. Advice should be viewed from behind. Empty barrels make the most noise. Eyes that do not cry, do not see. Fact is stranger than fiction. Fear less, hope more, eat less, chew more, whine less, breathe more, talk less, say more, hate less, love more, and all good things will be yours. Fear may force a man to cast beyond the moon. He who cannot keep silence cannot speak. Love is like dew that falls on both nettles and lilies. One should go invited to a friend in good fortune, and uninvited in misfortune. Shared joy is a double joy; shared sorrow is half a sorrow. Sweep first before your own door, before you sweep the doorsteps of your neighbors. The afternoon knows what the morning never suspected. The best place to find a helping hand is at the end of your own arm. Those who wish to sing always find a song. Thou are a bitter bird, said the raven to the starling. Thou hast a head and so hath a pin. Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn. What breaks in a moment may take years to mend. What can you expect from a pig but a grunt? What can't be alter'd must be borne, not blamed. When a blind man carries a lame man, both go forward. When the blind man carries the lame man, both go forward. Wisdom is in the head and not in the beard. Worry often gives a small thing a big shadow. The poor lack much, but the greedy more. When one shuts one eye, one does not hear everything. The stones of my river are as soft as a pillow. Abstinence is the best medicine. Kind words conquer. Popular agitation leads to justice. One who bathes willingly with cold water doesn't feel the cold. Little by little, a little becomes a lot. The roaring lion kills no game. The robin and the wren are God's cock and hen; the martin and the swallow are God's mate and marrow. No one can see their reflection in running water.  It is only in still water that we can see. The journey is the reward. To act sincerely with the insincere is dangerous. Never squat with your spurs on. When you throw dirt, you lose ground. The hyena does not forget where it has hidden its kill. A father deserted by a wise son is like being caught in a shower without a felt. Excellent people are honored wherever they go. Goodness speaks in a whisper, evil shouts. The wise understand by themselves, fools follow the reports of others. The wish is father to the thought. A defeated wrestler is not tired of wrestling. A heart in love with beauty never grows old. A knife wound heals; a wound caused by words does not. A man does not seek his luck, luck seeks its man. A person does not seek luck; luck seeks the person. A single advantage is worth a thousand sorceries. A thousand regrets do not cancel one debt. A thousand years hence the river will run as it did. A thread-bare coat is armour proof against highwaymen. A true word needs no oath. A weapon is an enemy even to its owner. Abundance is from activity. An ass does not appreciate fruit compote. An ember burns where it falls. An emmet may work its heart out, but can never make honey. An Englishman will burn his bed to catch a flea. An Englishman's home is his castle. An Englishman's word is his bond. Be thine enemy an ant, see in him an elephant. Call the bear "Uncle" till you are safe across the bridge. Call your husband cuckold in jest, an he'll never suspect you. Do not search for a calf under an ox. Even though you know a thousand things, ask the man who knows one. Even too much praise is a burden. God postpones, he does not overlook. Caution is not cowardice; even the ants march armed. The hunter in pursuit of an elephant does not stop to throw stones at birds. The husband is always the last to know. The person who has not traveled widely thinks his or her mother is the best cook. He is guilty who is not at home. Love tells us many things that are not so. Love thy neighbour, but pull not down thy hedge. Love well whip well. Love will find a way. Love will find a way.  Indifference will find an excuse. The church is near, but the way is icy.  The tavern is far, but I will walk carefully. The better the fruit, the more wasps to eat it. The garden must be prepared in the soul first or else it will not flourish. The hardest work is to go idle. The mills of God grind slowly but they grind finely. The most beautiful fig may contain a worm. The nail that sticks out is hammered down. [More about the need for conformity than about tools, although conformity is a tool of society.] The nut doesn't reveal the tree it contains. The plum tree, dwindling, contains less of the spring; But the garden is wider, and holds more of the moon. The rich would have to eat money if the poor did not provide food. The root of all health is in the brain. The trunk of it is in emotion. The branches and leaves are the body. The flower of health blooms when all parts work together. The world is a rose; smell it and pass it to your friends. Though a tree grows so high, the falling leaves return to the root. Tickle it with a hoe and it will laugh into a harvest. Tis better to buy a small bouquet And give to your friend this very day, Than a bushel of roses white and red To lay on his coffin after he's dead. To one who does not know, a small garden is a forest. `Uo `ia i ka manai ho`okahi. Strung like flowers on the same lei needle. Married. When the bee comes to your house, let her have beer; you may want to visit the bee's house some day. Better to lose a minute in your life than your life in a minute. Better to marry a neighbor than a stranger. There is nothing hidden between Heaven and Earth. There is nothing like leather. There is nothing lost by civility. Don't talk unless you can improve the silence. All cats are gray in the dark. Never forget benefits done you, regardless how small. One often gets what one disdains. People live with their own idiosyncrasies and die of their own illnesses. The rich worry over their money, the poor over their bread. Venture all; see what fate brings. When eating a fruit, think of the person who planted the tree. When the tree falls, any child can climb it. Challenge your preconceptions, or they will challenge you. Live long and prosper. A warm January; a cold May. A watched clock never tells the time. A watched pot never boils. A wife's advice is not worth much, but woe to the husband who refuses to take it. A willful fault has no excuse, and deserves no pardon. A willful man must have his way. Adversity and loss make a man wise. Adversity brings knowledge, and knowledge wisdom. Adversity comes with instruction in his hand. Be honorable yourself if you wish to associate with honorable people. Have a horse of your own and then you may borrow another's. He understands badly who listens badly. If every fool wore a crown, we should all be kings. If every man would sweep his own door-step the city would soon be clean. If you would get ahead, be a bridge. Man's mind is a watch that needs winding daily. Nothing is so clean as a fish. Of a compliment only a third is meant. Old age is a hundred disorders. Old age will not come alone. Reason is the wise man's guide, example the fool's. The advice of the aged will not mislead you. The best candle is understanding. Three remedies of the physicians of Myddfal:  water, honey, and labour. Three things it is best to avoid: a strange dog, a flood, and a man who thinks he is wise. A hare is like an ass in the length of its ears, yet it is not its son. A talkative bird will not build a nest. A tattler is war than a thief. Everybody loves a fool, but nobody wants him for a son. Everybody loves a lord. Fear is no obstacle to death. The jay bird don't rob his own nest. About a donkey's taste why need we fret us?  To lips like his a thistle is a lettuce. The master of the people is their servant. A child's tear rends the heavens. A chip off the old block. A chip on the shoulder indicates wood higher up. A dog without teeth will also attack a bone. A fool is his own informer. A fool says what he knows, and a wise man knows what he says. A fool shows his annoyance at once, but a prudent man overlooks an insult. A fool who can keep silent is counted among the wise. A golden key will open every lock. A half truth is a whole lie. A jest is half a truth. A joke driven too far brings home hate. A man cannot jump over his own shadow. A man cannot spin and reel at the same time. A man comes from the dust and in the dust he will end--and in the meantime it is good to drink a sip of vodka. A man is not honest simply because he never had a chance to steal. A man is not old until his regrets take the place of his dreams. A man should live if only to satisfy his curiosity. A penny is a lot of money--if you haven't got a penny. A penny is sometimes better spent than spared. A penny saved is a penny earned. A rich man who is stingy is the worst pauper. A rich man's foolish sayings pass for wise ones. A rich mouthful, a heavy groan. A snake deserves no pity. If you can't bite, don't show your teeth. What you give you get, ten times over. A great affair covers up a small matter. Anyone who sees beauty and does not look at it will soon be poor. Because friendship is pleasant, we partake of our friend's entertainment; not because we have not enough to eat in our own house. Fear a silent man.  He has lips like a drum. Many words do not fill a basket. Silence is an attribute of the dead; he who is alive speaks. The young cannot teach tradition to the old. The young cock crows as he hears the old one. Words are like spears:  Once they leave your lips they can never come back. Work is the medicine for poverty. Complain to one who can help you. A good rest is half the work. Don't go selling the hide while the bear remains in the hole. Don't guild the lily. If envy would burn, there would be no need for wood. If ever you should need my life, come and take it. One ounce of good luck is better than a ton of brains. Tell the truth and run. Tell the truth and shame the Devil. War ends nothing. One who enters a forest does not listen to the breaking of the twigs in the brush. Be master of mind rather than mastered by mind. Better to see the face than to hear the name. Better to sit all night than to go to bed with a dragon. Better to struggle with a sick jackass than carry the wood by yourself. Chop wood, carry water. From the withered tree, a flower blooms. Only when you can be extremely pliable and soft can you be extremely hard and strong. Sitting quietly, doing nothing, spring comes, and the grass grows by itself. The infinite is in the finite of every instant. A coward has no scar. An elephant's tusks are never too heavy for it. We will be grateful to flowers only if they have born fruits. 